


1. CP/M-86 KERMIT

Authors:    Bill  Catchings,  Columbia  University; Ron Blanford, University of
            Washington; Richard Garland, Columbia University.
Language:   Digital Research ASM86
Version:    2.9
Date:       December 1984
Documentation:
            Frank da Cruz, Columbia

This  version  of  KERMIT is designed to support any CP/M-86 system.  So far it
supports the DEC Rainbow-100 and the NEC Advanced Personal Computer (APC).   It
is very similar to CP/M-80 and MS DOS KERMIT.


CP/M-86 KERMIT-86 Capabilities At A Glance:

  Local operation:                   Yes
  Remote operation:                  No
  Transfers text files:              Yes
  Transfers binary files:            Yes
  Wildcard send:                     Yes
  ^X/^Y interruption:                Yes
  Filename collision avoidance:      Yes
  Can time out:                      Yes
  8th-bit prefixing:                 Yes
  Repeat count prefixing:            No
  Alternate block checks:            No
  Terminal emulation:                Yes, uses PC firmware (VT100)
  Communication settings:            Yes; duplex, parity
  Transmit BREAK:                    Yes
  IBM communication:                 Yes
  Transaction logging:               No
  Session logging (raw download):    Yes
  Raw upload:                        No
  Act as server:                     No
  Talk to server:                    Yes; SEND, GET, FIN, BYE
  Advanced commands for servers:     No
  Local file management:             Yes
  Handle file attributes:            No
  Command/init files:                Yes
  Printer control:                   No


                          CP/M-86 KERMIT DESCRIPTION

Since  Kermit-86  runs  on  a  standalone micro, it is always in control of the
screen -- it is always local.  Thus, it always keeps the  screen  updated  with
the  file  name and the packet number, whether sending or receiving.  Kermit-86
is capable of timing out  an  input  request,  and  can  thus  break  deadlocks
automatically.   In most cases, however, this is not desirable because the KER-
MIT on the other side is most likely better able to handle the timeouts; there-
fore, Kermit-86's timer is normally not used.

If  despite  the  timeout capability, the transmission appears to be stuck (and
you can tell that this has happened if the screen fails to change  for  a  long



while)  you  can  type  carriage return to have the micro do what it would have
done on a  timeout, namely NAK the expected packet to cause to foreign host  to
send  it  again  (or,  if the micro is sending, to retransmit the last packet).
Micro/micro or micro/IBM-mainframe transfers could require this kind of  manual
intervention.

File transfers may be interrupted in several ways.

Control-C       This will return you to Kermit-86 command level immediately, so
                that you can connect back to the remote  system,  or  take  any
                other desired action.

Control-X       When  sending  a  file,  this will terminate the sending of the
                current file with a signal to the KERMIT on the other  side  to
                discard  what  it  got  so  far.  If there are more files to be
                sent, KERMIT-86 will go on to the next one.  When  receiving  a
                file, KERMIT-86 will send a signal to the remote KERMIT to stop
                sending this file.  If the remote KERMIT understands this  sig-
                nal  (not  all  implementations  of KERMIT do), it will comply,
                otherwise the file will keep  coming.    In  either  case,  the
                remote KERMIT will go on to the next file in the group, if any.

Control-Z       Like  Control-X,  except  if a file group is being transmitted,
                this will stop the transmission of the entire group.  If only a
                single  file  is  being  transmitted,  it  works  exactly  like
                Control-X.

Carriage Returns
                If you type carriage return repeatedly Kermit-86 will retry the
                current packet up to its retry limit (somewhere between  5  and
                16  times)  and then, if no valid response was received, return
                to Kermit-86 command level.

When KERMIT-86 is started, it looks for the file KERMIT.INI.  If found, it  ex-
ecutes  KERMIT-86  commands  from  it  before  prompting you for commands.  The
KERMIT-86 prompt looks like this:  

  Kermit-86 B3>

in which "B" is your current default disk and "3" is the current  default  user
number.


1.1. Kermit-86 Commands

KERMIT-86  uses  the DECSYSTEM-20 keyword style command language.  Each keyword
may be abbreviated to its minumum unique length.  "?" may be typed to request a
menu  of the available options for the current field at any point in a command.
ESC may be typed at any point in a command to fill out the current  keyword  or
filename;  if sufficient characters have not been typed to identify the current
field uniquely, KERMIT-86 will sound a beep and allow you to continue from that
point.

CONNECT Establish  a "virtual terminal" connection to any host that may be con-
        nected to the serial port, i.e. pass all typein to the serial port  and
        display  all  input  from  the  serial  port  on  the screen, using the



        system's own built-in support for  ANSI  (VT100-like)  screen  control.
        When you issue the CONNECT command, the PC will print a message telling
        you how to get back by typing an an escape sequence, an uncommonly-used
        control character, normally CTRL-backslash, followed by a single letter
        "command".

        C   Close Connection, return to Kermit-86> command level.
        ?   List available single-character commands.
        B   Send a BREAK signal.
        Q   Quit logging the remote session.
        R   Resume logging the remote session.
        L   Toggle logging.
        ^\  (or whatever - a second copy of the escape character) Send the  es-
            cape character itself to the remote host.

SEND filespec
        Send file(s) specified by filespec to  the  remote  Kermit,  using  the
        prevailing file mode (ASCII or BINARY; see SET).  The filespec may con-
        tain CP/M wildcards.

RECEIVE Receive file(s) from the remote Kermit.  Store  them  under  the  names
        provided in the file headers supplied by the remote host.  If the names
        aren't legal, use as many legal characters from the  name  as  possible
        (see  the  description  of  SET FILE-WARNING below).  If there's a con-
        flict, and FILE-WARNING is ON, warn the user and try to build a  unique
        name  for  the file by adding "&" characters to the name.  You may also
        provide an optional file name in the RECEIVE command; if  you  do,  the
        incoming  file will be stored under the name you specify.  If more than
        one file arrives, only the first will be stored under the  given  name,
        unless  you  included  wildcard  characters in the RECEIVE filespec; in
        that case, the filespec will be used as a mask for incoming  filenames.
        For  instance, you told the remote Kermit to send *.ASM, you could tell
        KERMIT-86 to "receive *.A86", thereby changing the filetype of all  the
        incoming files.

GET filespec
        When Kermit-86 is talking to a Kermit Server on the  host,  you  should
        use the GET command to request the server to send files to you, for ex-
        ample: get hlp:k*.hlp

BYE     When talking to a remote Kermit Server, this  command  shuts  down  the
        server  and  logs it out, and also exits from Kermit-86 to CP/M command
        level.

LOGOUT  Like BYE, but leaves you at Kermit-86 command level.

FINISH  Like LOGOUT, but shuts down the remote server without logging  it  out.
        Leaves  you  at  Kermit-86  command level; a subsequent CONNECT command
        should put you back at host system command level.

EXIT    Exit from KERMIT-86 back to CP/M.

QUIT    Synonym for EXIT.

SET parameter [value]
        Set the specified parameter to the specified value.  Possible settings:



        BAUD    Change  the baud rate of the communications port.  This command
                only works on some systems, and its actual operation  can  vary
                from  system  to  system.  Type SET BAUD followed by a question
                mark, and follow the directions.  On systems that do  not  sup-
                port this command, you must set the port baud rate from CP/M or
                other setup mechanism outside of KERMIT-86.

        DEBUG   ON or OFF.  If  ON,  displays  incoming  and  outbound  packets
                during file transfer.  OFF by default.

        DEFAULT-DISK disk/user
                Specify default disk and user number for subsequent file recep-
                tion and transmission.  The specification following the command
                must be in one of the following forms:

                    d:  = go to drive d (A through P) without changing user
                    u:  = go to user u (0 through 15) without changing drive
                    du: = go to drive d and user u
                    :   = go to the defaults when Kermit was loaded

                Whenever a drive is specified, even if it is the  same  as  the
                current default drive, the drive is logged in so that disks can
                be swapped without exiting Kermit to type  control-C.    Kermit
                restores the original drive and user upon termination.

        ESCAPE  Change  the  escape character for virtual terminal connections.
                Select a character in the control range that you  will  not  be
                likely  to  need  at  the  remote  host; type the new character
                literally.   Certain  characters,  like  Control-X,  cannot  be
                specified.

        FILE-TYPE
                Tells KERMIT-86 what kind of file it is sending, so that KERMIT
                can  correctly  determine the end of the file.  SET FILE BINARY
                means to send all the 128-byte blocks of  the  file,  including
                the last block in its entirety; SET FILE ASCII is used for text
                files, and transmission stops when the first Control-Z  is  en-
                countered anywhere in the file (this is the CP/M convention for
                marking the end of a text file).   If  binary  transmission  is
                used  on  a text file, some extraneous characters (up to 127 of
                them) may appear at the end of the file on the  target  system.
                If ASCII transmission is used on a binary file, the entire file
                will not be sent if it happens to contain any data  bytes  that
                correspond to Control-Z.  ASCII is the default.

        FLOW-CONTROL
                Select the desired type of flow control to be used on the  com-
                munication  line.  The choices are NONE and XON/XOFF.  XON/XOFF
                is the default.  If the remote system is  not  full  duplex  or
                cannot do XON/XOFF, you should use NONE.

        IBM ON (or OFF)
                Allow the transfer of files to and from an IBM  mainframe  com-
                puter.    This  makes  Kermit-86  wait  for  the IBM turnaround
                character (XON), ignore parity on input, add appropriate parity
                to  output,  and  use  local  echoing  during CONNECT.  As dis-



                tributed, KERMIT-86 uses MARK parity for IBM communication.  If
                you don't give this command, IBM mode is OFF.  Since IBM VM/CMS
                KERMIT does not have timeout capability, SET IBM ON also  turns
                on the timeout facility automatically, as if you had typed "SET
                TIMER ON".

        LOCAL-ECHO ON (or OFF)
                When  you  CONNECT to a remote host, you must set LOCAL-ECHO ON
                if the host is half  duplex,  OFF  if  full  duplex.    OFF  by
                default.

        LOG     Specify  a  log  file  on  the  current CP/M disk into which to
                record incoming characters during CONNECT.  If the remote  host
                can  do XON/XOFF, then the log file will normally capture every
                character shown on the screen.  When connected  to  the  remote
                system,  several  single-character arguments to the connect es-
                cape character can be used to control logging --  Q  (quit),  R
                (resume), L (toggle).  If you use R or L during connect without
                having previously specified a log file name, then KERMIT.LOG is
                used.  An open log is closed when you escape back to the PC.

        PARITY  Sets  parity  for  outgoing characters to one of the following:
                NONE, SPACE, MARK, EVEN, or ODD.  On input, if parity is  NONE,
                then  the  8th  bit is kept (as data), otherwise it is stripped
                and ignored.  The parity setting applies to both terminal  con-
                nection and file transfer.  If you set parity to anything other
                than NONE, Kermit-86 will attempt to use "8th bit prefixing" to
                transfer  binary files.  If the other KERMIT is also capable of
                8th bit prefixing, then binary files can  be  transferred  suc-
                cessfully;  if  not, the 8th bit of each data byte will be lost
                (you will see a warning on your screen if this happens).

        PORT    Allows you to switch between different communication  ports  on
                the PC.  This command is not available on all systems.

        TIMER ON (or OFF)
                Enable or disable the timeout facility.  The timer  is  off  by
                default,  because in the normal case KERMIT-86 is communicating
                with a mainframe KERMIT that has its own timer.  Mainframe KER-
                MIT  timers  tend  to  be more precise or adaptable to changing
                conditions.  You should SET TIMER ON if you  are  communicating
                with another KERMIT that does not have a timer.  You should SET
                TIMER OFF if you are communicating over  a  network  with  long
                delays.

        WARNING ON (or OFF)
                Warn user of  filename  conflicts  when  receiving  files  from
                remote  host,  and  attempt to generate a unique name by adding
                "&" characters to the given name.  OFF by default.

SHOW    Show the current settings of the SET parameters.

TAKE    Take KERMIT-86 commands from the specified file.  The file  should  not
        contain any TAKE commands; nested command files do not work.

LOCAL   This  is  a  prefix  for local file management commands, to distinguish



        them from remote file management  commands  (which  aren't  implemented
        yet).   The LOCAL prefix is optional; if left off, the commands will be
        performed locally.

        SPACE           Show how much space is used and remaining on  the  cur-
                        rent disk.

        DIRECTORY       Provide a directory listing for the current disk, show-
                        ing the name and size of each file.  A filespec may  be
                        given  to  select  only a certain file or wildcard file
                        group.

        DELETE          Delete the specified files from the current disk.

        TYPE            A wildcard filespec is accepted and files displayed al-
                        phabetically.    The  display  is paged in Unix fashion
                        with "--more--" displayed on the last line.  Typein op-
                        tions at that point can be obtained by hitting a '?'.


1.2. Installation:

CP/M-86 KERMIT is broken up into several source modules:

      86KERCMD.A86        Command parser
      86KERFIL.A86        File handler
      86KERIO.xxx         System Dependent I/O
      86KERMIT.A86        Main Program
      86KERPRO.A86        Protocol Module
      86KERTRM.A86        Terminal Emulation
      86KERUTL.A86        Utilities

The  main  program  module,  86KERMIT.A86,  contains INCLUDE directives for the
other files.  The 86KERIO module  is  stored  with  suffixes  that  denote  the
machine  for  which  the  program is being built -- RB for Rainbow, APC for NEC
APC.  The program may be built on the  CP/M-86  system  by  obtaining  all  the
source  files listed above, storing them on the current disk with the names in-
dicated, renaming the appropriate 86KERIO.xxx file to be 86KERIO.A86, and  then
doing:

      ASM86 86KERMIT $PZ  (takes about 6 minutes on the Rainbow)
      GENCMD 86KERMIT     (takes less than a minute)

and, if desired,

      REN KERMIT.CMD=86KERMIT.CMD


1.3. DEC Rainbow 100 Support

KERMIT-86 runs on the DEC Rainbow 100 or 100+ under CP/M-86/80, version 1 or 2,
on the 8088 side.  It uses the built-in firmware to emulate a VT102  ANSI  ter-
minal during CONNECT, and runs well at speeds up to 9600 baud.

You should be able to download the program using the old KERMIT on the Z80 side
(Rainbow Kermit, VT180 Kermit, or generic CP/M-80 Kermit will do the  job,  but



only under DEC CP/M-86/80 version 1.0), or an earlier version of KERMIT-86.

If  you don't have an earlier version of KERMIT, then follow the directions for
installing KERMIT-80 (yes, KERMIT-80) in the KERMIT-80 section  of  the  KERMIT
User  Guide,  but  send the KERMIT-86 hex file instead.  This works because the
Rainbow can run CP/M-80 programs like DDT.

Another way to get KERMIT onto your Rainbow for the first time would be from  a
DEC VT-180 diskette.  A VT-180 can use its own KERMIT to load RBKERMIT onto its
disk, which can then be read directly by a Rainbow.   Also,  note  that  VT-180
KERMIT-80  can actually run on the Rainbow on the Z80 side under DEC CP/M-86/80
version 1 (but not version 2 or higher), at speeds of 1800 baud or lower.


1.4. NEC Advanced Personal Computer Support

(Contributed by Ron Blanford, University of Washington)

Currently only the standard serial port is supported, and not the H14 auxiliary
port.  The SET PORT command is not implemented.

While  in  Kermit's  terminal emulation mode, local commands are initiated by a
two-character sequence consisting of the "escape  character"  followed  by  one
other  character  identifying the command.  (Make the second character a '?' to
see a list of the valid commands.)  As distributed, the standard Kermit-86 uses
the  control-backslash character as the escape character in terminal mode.  The
trouble is that the CP/M-86 BIOS  in  the  APC  ignores  a  keyboard  entry  of
Control-\  (i.e.  holding down the CTRL key while striking the '\' key), making
it difficult (impossible) to use this method to get out of terminal mode.

One solution is to perform a "SET ESCAPE ^" command  before  entering  terminal
mode  to change the escape character to a caret (or any other character the APC
keyboard will generate).  This command could be placed in your KERMIT.INI  file
for automatic execution every time Kermit is started.

The simpler solution is to realize that the character code for a Control-\ is a
hexadecimal 1C, and that this is the code generated  by  the  INS  key  on  the
numeric keypad.  Once you can remember that every reference to Control-\ should
be interpreted as a reference to the INS key, this is actually  easier  to  use
than the two-key Control-\ sequence.

In  the  standard  CP/M-86  BIOS,  the  unshifted DEL key generates a Control-X
character (hexadecimal 18).  This is the CP/M command to erase the current  in-
put  line, and is very useful for local processing.  Most mainframes do not use
the Control-X character at all, so it becomes much less useful during  terminal
emulation.    The  DEL  character (hexadecimal 7F), on the other hand, is often
used by mainframes and can only be generated on the APC  by  holding  down  the
SHIFT key while striking the DEL key (this capability is not mentioned anywhere
in the documentation).

Because the Control-X character is so seldom used while the  DEL  character  is
commonly  used,  the initialization procedure in Kermit-86 modifies the CP/M-86
BIOS so that the DEL key generates the DEL character whether  shifted  or  not.
Control-X  can  still  be  generated  if necessary by holding down the CTRL key
while striking the 'X' key.  The CP/M-86 BIOS is returned to its original state
when Kermit terminates.



The  APC uses escape sequences which have been standardized by the American Na-
tional Standards Institute (ANSI) to control cursor movement,  screen  erasing,
and  character  attribute  manipulation.  Perhaps the best-known other terminal
which follows ANSI guidelines is the DEC VT100.  The APC only recognizes a  few
of  the  more important ANSI commands, and not the complete set which the VT100
supports.

The ANSI/VT100 features that the NEC APC supports are:

   - direct cursor addressing (by row and column)
   - relative cursor addressing (up, down, left, right)
   - line erasing (cursor to end, beginning to cursor, entire line)
   - screen erasing (cursor to end, beginning to cursor, entire screen)
   - character attributes (underline, reverse video, blink, but not bold)

In addition, the first four grey function keys (unshifted) generate the  escape
sequences  associated  with  PF1  through PF4 on the VT100 keyboard.  The arrow
keys and numeric keypad DO NOT generate the corresponding VT100 sequences.

These functions are enough to support simple command line editing on most  sys-
tems,  and allow mailers or paged file display programs to clear the screen be-
fore each display.  Underlining and reverse video are also useful in  some  ap-
plications.    This is not enough to support the more sophisticated screen con-
trol required by screen editors such as EMACS or KED.  In addition,  due  to  a
bug  in the implementation of the CP/M-86 BIOS, the sequence ordinarily used to
home the cursor (esc [ H) does not work correctly; a patch for CP/M to  correct
this problem is distributed with APC Kermit-86.



Index

          APC   6

          Baud   2
          BYE   2

          Connect   1

          Debugging   3
          DEC Rainbow   5

          Eighth-Bit Prefix   4
          Escape Character   1, 3

          File-Warning   2
          FINISH   2
          Flow Control   3

          GET   2

          IBM   3

          Local   0
          Local-Echo   4
          LOG   4
          LOGOUT   2

          NAK   1
          NEC Advanced Personal Computer
                  6

          Parity   4

          Rainbow 100   5
          RECEIVE   2

          SEND   2
          SET   2
          SHOW   4

          TAKE   4
          Timeout   0, 1
          TIMER   4

          Virtual Terminal   1

          Warning   4



                               Table of Contents

1. CP/M-86 KERMIT                                                             0

   1.1. Kermit-86 Commands                                                    1
   1.2. Installation:                                                         5
   1.3. DEC Rainbow 100 Support                                               5
   1.4. NEC Advanced Personal Computer Support                                6

Index                                                                         i
